[HEADING] B.7

Economics plays an important role in improving health sector outcomes because health resources are limited while the demand for healthcare is very large. Health economics studies how available resources can be used in the most efficient and fair manner to improve the health of the population.

One important contribution of economics is resource allocation. Governments have limited funds for hospitals, medicines, doctors, vaccination, sanitation and other health services. Economics helps decide where public expenditure can produce the greatest improvement in health.

Economics also helps in setting priorities. A government may have to choose between spending more on expensive hospital treatment and spending on preventive measures such as vaccination, nutrition, clean drinking water and disease control. Economic analysis can compare the benefits of different programmes and help policymakers choose effective options.

Another contribution is cost effectiveness analysis. Different treatments may produce similar health outcomes but at different costs. Health economics helps identify treatments and programmes that provide better results with available resources.

Economics is also useful in understanding health insurance. Serious illness can create a heavy financial burden on families. Insurance allows the cost of healthcare to be shared among a large number of people. Economic analysis helps in designing insurance systems that increase access to healthcare while controlling unnecessary expenditure.

The subject also studies inequality in healthcare. Poor people, rural households and socially disadvantaged groups may have less access to doctors, hospitals and medicines. Economic policies can be used to improve access through public hospitals, subsidies, insurance and better distribution of medical facilities.

Another area is pricing of medicines and health services. If medicines are too expensive, many patients may not be able to purchase them. At the same time, producers require sufficient incentives to manufacture medicines and develop new treatments. Economics helps policymakers understand this balance.

Health economics also examines the supply of healthcare workers. Shortages of doctors, nurses and other professionals can reduce the quality of services. Governments can use education policy, wages, incentives and rural service programmes to improve their distribution.

Economics also shows that preventive healthcare can create wider benefits. Vaccination, sanitation, nutrition and control of infectious diseases do not only benefit one individual. They may protect the wider community and reduce future medical costs.

Better health also contributes to economic development. Healthy people can work more regularly, children can attend school more consistently and workers can remain productive for a longer period.

Therefore, economics improves health sector outcomes by helping governments use scarce resources efficiently, control costs, improve access, reduce inequality and choose health programmes that provide greater benefits to society.